<!-- # Files Explanation  -->
# Data Formats
This document explains the meaning of every term in every file used in [The dataset H<sup>2</sup>TC](https://lipengroboticsx.github.io/). For those specific digits, such as subject IDs or device IDs, the [reference](#reference) exlpains their meanings. 

<!--The data is organized by take `data/{take_id}` that contains multiple synchronized data streams of a recorded throw&catch activity. The dataset also contains  multiple supporting files:  `annotations` contains annotation flies which provide semantic and dense annotations, `subjects.csv` and `objects.csv` contain meta data of subjects and objects respectively, and `log.xlsx` contains recording logs.  -->


Here is a quick overview about the files explained in this document. 
To distinguish, hereafter, the **file** presents **bold**, while the ***folder*** presents **bold** and *italic*. <br>
<!-- ## Overview -->
* [***data/***](#data)
  * ***{take ID}/***: take folder named by the take id e.g. 000000
    * ***raw/***: raw data directly exported by each recording device
    * ***processed/***: formatted data derived from raw data
* [***annotations/***](#annotations)
  * **{take ID}.json**: annotation result for the take id e.g. 000000
* [**log.xlsx**](#supporting-files): logbook with the recording parameters of all takes
* [**subjects.csv**](#supporting-files): the list of the subjects participating in the experiments
* [**objects.csv**](#supporting-files): the list of used objects


## Data
<!-- <details><summary>Explanation about all files in data folder</summary> -->
Before reading the file details below, please check the [data processing document](https://github.com/lipengroboticsx/H2TC_code/tree/main/#data-processing) first to capture how we process data.
[tbd: small]
<small>Note that the raw data **not used** in the processing is highlighted by the <u>underline</u>.</small>

* ***{take ID}/***: take folder named by the take id, e.g. 000000.
  * ***raw/***: raw data directly exported by each recording device. 
    * ***hand/***: hand pose data generated by [Hand Engine](https://stretchsense.com/solution/hand-engine/). [tbd: add frame] The coordinate frame is introduced [here](https://github.com/lipengroboticsx/H2TC_code/tree/main/doc/processing_techdetails.md#•-hand-pose-data-coordinate)
      * **P1L.csv** / **P1R.csv**: sensor reading and hand pose data of left (L) and right (R) hand.  
        * <u>Capacitance 0-15</u>: capacitance reading in picofarad (pF) of wrist sensor and 15 splay sensors.
        * <u>IMU 1-10</u>: N/A (the glove version we used doesn't contain IMU sensors).
        * Timecode (device): timecode from the clock inside the gloves ticks as data starts generating.
        * <u>Timer (device)</u>: gloves internal timer that ticks every 1/120 s.
        * <u>Timecode (master)</u>: timecode from the clock of the host where [Hand Engine](https://stretchsense.com/solution/hand-engine/) software runs ticks as each frame processed by [Hand Engine](https://stretchsense.com/solution/hand-engine/).
        * hand: the wrist joint pose in eular-angle format (xyz degrees). 
        * index 00-03, middle 00-03, pinky 00-03, ring 00-03, thumb 01-03: hand joint pose in eular-angle format (xyz degrees). Each joint pose is the relative rotation with respect to its parent in the kinematic tree. Please refer to [the paper]() for the detail of the used hand model and its articulated links.  
      * **P1LMeta.json** / **P1RMeta.json**: metadata about the hardware and recording setting. 
      * <u>**P1L.cal** / **P1R.cal**</u>: calibration data. 
      * <u>**P1L.fbx** / **P1R.fbx**</u>: hand model saved in the .fbx file format.  
    * **17471.svo / 24483054.svo / 28280967.svo**: the recording files of ZED RGBD cameras with videos of left and right views and metadata. Check [stereolabs ZED document](https://www.stereolabs.com/docs/video/recording/) for more information. The digits denote the serial number (SN) of the recording device. Specifically, 17471 is the fixed third person view camera, 24483054 is the dynamic egocentric view camera, and 28280967 is the fixed egocentric view camera.
    * **17471.csv / 24483054.csv / 28280967.csv**: the timestamps of the frames in video. The digits, similarly as above, refer to the SN of the recording device. Note that the timestamps start from starting recording, so the second timestamp is actually the timestamp of the first frame. Therefore, the first timestamp in this file is always discarded when processing or aligning the streams. The data structure is: 
      * nanoseconds: header of the unit
      * the timestamp of the beginning of recording
      * the timestamp of the 1st frame 
      * the timestamp of the 2nd frame
      * ... 
      * the timestamp of the N-th frame 
    *  **event_{timestamp}.raw**: the raw output of the event camera. It includes general metadata  and events information encoded in [EVT3.0](https://docs.prophesee.ai/stable/data/encoding_formats/evt3.html?highlight=data%20format) format. Refer to [prophesee event documentation](https://docs.prophesee.ai/stable/index.html) for details. The digits `{timestamp}` in the file name log the timestamp of starting recording, which is used later in the processing pipeline to align the event stream with other streams. 
    * <u>**event.bias**</u>: event sensor settings. Check [event bias](https://docs.prophesee.ai/stable/hw/manuals/biases.html) for detailed information.
      <!-- * bias_diff, bias_diff_off, bias_diff_on: contrast sensitivity threshold biases control the light sensitivity of the sensor, so that the sensor’s pixels are triggered when there is a required difference of illumination (i.e. contrast). The thresholds are expressed as the difference between “bias_diff_on” and “bias_diff” values (for positive light changes) and “bias_diff” and “bias_diff_off” values (for negative light changes).
      * bias_fo_n: buffer bandwidth controls the pixel low-pass cut-off frequency (sets the bandwidth of the post-photoreceptor sThece follower). It is useful to control noise events, i.e. background activity.
      * bias_hpf: high-pass filter controls the strength of a High-Pass Filter that removes low frequency noise (spontaneous background activity)
      * bias_pr: photoreceptor bandwidth controls the frond-end part of the pixel. 
      * bias_refr: deadtime sets the “refractory period” during which the Change Detector is switched off after generating an event. This parameter controls the sampling rate of the pixels and hence the output data rate of the sensor. -->
    * **optitrack.csv**: object tracking information recorded by [OptiTrack](https://optitrack.com/).
      * object id: the id of the tracked object. Check [OptiTrack object ID](#reference) for each id's representation. [tbd: refer to ids]
      * <u>frame</u>: the frame index maintained by the OptiTrack server.
      * <u>mean error</u>: mean error of localization.
      * timestamp: timestamp of the optitrack cameras capturing the frames. 
      It is calculated by subtracting the latency. 
      <!-- , generated by the client clock, of receiving data on the client -->
      * <u>latency</u>: the span of time from the exposure of the cameras to the reception of data. 
      <!-- on the client.  -->
      * <u>local transformtion matrix</u>: local pose transformation matrix reference to the start pose frame. The matrix has a size of 4x4 and is unfolded by row.
      * global transformtion matrix: global pose reference to the OptiTrack world frame. The matrix has a size of 4x4 and is unfolded by row. 
  * ***processed/***: formatted data derived from raw data. 
    * ***rgbd0/***: left view RGB images and normalized depth images from the fixed third-person (side) view ZED RGBD camera (SN: 17471).
      * **left_{frame_ID}.png**: RGB images produced by the left view camera of ZED. Left view RGB images aligns with the corresponding depth maps, which is set internally by [ZED SDK](https://www.stereolabs.com/docs/video/recording/). The digits `{frame_ID}` represent the frame index. 
      * **depth_{frame_ID}.png**: normalized depth images. They align with the corresponding left-view RGB images. The digits `{frame_ID}` represent the frame index. They should be only used for the purpose of visualization since it doesn't contain the real depth values. The next `depth.npy` contains the real depth values. 
      * **depth.npy**: 3-dimensional numpy arrary holding the unnormalized depth estimation of each frame. This aligns with left-view RGB images as specified by [ZED SDK](https://www.stereolabs.com/docs/video/recording/). This is usually used as the input data for learning. The unit of depth is millimeter. 
        * dimension 0: frame index
        * dimension 1: height in range [0, 719] where 0 corresponds to the top of the image
        * dimension 2: width in range [0, 1279] where 0 corresponds to the left of the image
    * ***rgbd1/***: similar data as *rgbd0/* but from the dynamic egocentric view ZED RGBD camera (SN: 24483054).
    * ***rgbd2/***: similar data as *rgbd0/* but from the fixed third-person (back) view ZED RGBD camera (SN: 28280967). 
    * **rgbd0_ts.csv**: the timestamps of rgbd0 frames. This is same to the timestamp file as /raw/17471.csv except renamed to be more interpretable.
    * **rgbd1_ts.csv**: similar data as `rgbd0_ts.csv` but for rgbd1 frames.
    * **rgbd2_ts.csv**: similar data as `rgbd0_ts.csv` but for rgbd2 frames.
    * **event_xypt.csv**: the decoded [Contrast Detector (CD) events](https://docs.prophesee.ai/stable/concepts.html#event-generation).
      * x: width in range[0, 1279] where 0 corresponds to the left of the image
      * y: height in range[0, 719] where 0 corresponds to the top of the image
      * p: polarity
        * 0: CD event off, i.e. detecting a negative contrast that light changes from lighter to darker
        * 1: CD event on, i.e. detecting a positive contrast that light changes from darker to lighter
      * t: timestamp of the light change.
    * ***event/***: frame-based visualization of events.
      * **{frame_ID}.jpg**: a frame visualization of events accumulated in a fixed time span (1/60 second for 60 FPS). For each pixel, it is initialized with the background color (dark blue). If the polarity of the event located at the pixel occurs positive (negative) over the time span, the pixel changes to white (light blue). Check [event generation](https://docs.prophesee.ai/stable/concepts.html#event-generation) for details. The digits `{frame_ID}` represent the frame index. 
    * **event_frames_ts.csv**: timestamps of each event frame in the above directory *event/*.
    * **left_hand_pose.csv**: the pose data of the left hand produced based on `/raw/hand/P1L.csv`.
      * timestamp: the unix format time derived from timecode(device) in raw data file `/raw/hand/P1L.csv`.
      * hand, index 00-03, middle 00-03, pinky 00-03, ring 00-03 and thumb 01-03: same as what they are in raw data.
    * **right_hand_pose.csv**: similar pose data as `left_hand_pose.csv` but for right hand produced based on `/raw/hand/P1R.csv`.
    * **sub1_head_motion.csv**: the position and orientation of the subject1's helmet corresponding to the OptiTrack object 115 in `/raw/optitrack.csv`.
      * timestamp: the same timestamp as in raw data file `/raw/optitrack.csv`.
      * x, y, z: the position of the object in the throw-catch coordinate system (introduced [here](https://github.com/lipengroboticsx/H2TC_code/tree/main/doc/processing_techdetails.md#the-coordinate-setting)). Note that the coordinate is Y-up, and the origin point is at the bottom left. [tbd: frame]
      * qx, qy, qz, qw: the quaternion orientation of the object in The coordinate system. 
    * **sub1_left_hand_motion.csv**: the subject1's  left hand motion (OptiTrack object id is 117 in `/raw/optitrack.csv`). Similar data structure as `sub1_head_motion.csv`. 
    * **sub1_right_hand_motion.csv**: the subject1's  right hand motion (OptiTrack object id is 116 in `/raw/optitrack.csv`). Similar data structure as `sub1_head_motion.csv`. 
    * **sub2_head_motion.csv**: the subject2's  head motion (OptiTrack object id is 118 in `/raw/optitrack.csv`). Similar data structure as `sub1_head_motion.csv`. 
    <!-- a dictionary whose keys represent the frame indices. The corresponding value for each key is a mapping between stream id and its timestamp. In each frame (key), we align each stream timestamp to the frame reference timestamp (`rgbd0`) by finding the closest one to the reference. -->
    * [tbd: rewrite: alignment] **alignment.json**: 
    a dictionary whose keys represent the frame indices. Inside each frame (key), there is another dictionary which indicates the multi-modal streams and their corresponding timestamps. These streams are aligned by finding the closest timestamp to the reference timestamp (`rgbd0`).
      * frame index: starting from 0
        * key: stream id
        * value: timestamp
<!-- </details> -->
<br>

## Annotations
<!-- <details><summary>Exlanation about annotation labels </summary> -->
Before reading the file details below, please check the [annotation document](https://github.com/lipengroboticsx/H2TC_code/tree/main/#annotator) first to capture how we annotate data. 
* **{take ID}.json**: metadata and the annotation data of the take. 
  * status: annotation status.
    * 1: finished
    * 0: not finished
    * -1: problematic, need further inspect
  * take_id: the index of the take.
  * object: the name of the object being thrown or caught in this take.
  * catch_result: the result of catching.
    * 1: success
    * 0: failed
  * sub1_cmd: the command given to the subject 1 to instruct the behavior of throwing or catching. See [Sec. Protocol in the paper]() for more instructions details. Please refer to [log.xlsx](#supporting-files) for the explanation of the attributes below.
    * subject_id: the id of the subject 1
    * hand: grasp mode, `single` or `both`
    * position: 2 dimensional location (x, z)
    * action: `throw` or `catch`
  * sub2_cmd: the command given to the subject 2. See [Sec. Protocol in the paper]() for more instructions details and check [Figure 3 in the paper]() for hand vertical/horizontal locations.  
    * subject_id: the id of the subject 2
    * hand: grasp mode, `single` or `both`
    * position: 2 dimensional location (x, z)
    * action: `throw` or `catch`
    * hand_vertical: relative vertical position of the hand
      * value: `overhead`, `overhand`, `chest` or `underhand`
    * hand_horizontal: relative horizontal position of the hand
      * value: `right`, `middle` or `left` 
      * this attribute is only given when the action to be performed by the subject 2 is `catch`.
    * throwing_speed: the speed of throwing away the object 
      * value: `fast`, `normal` or `slow`
      * this is only given when the action to be performed by the subject 2 is `throw`
  * throw: annotation data for the moment `throw`.
    * hand: grasp mode for throwing the object
      * value: `left`, `right` or `both`
      * this is different from "hand" in the subjects' command in two ways: 1) It replaces the `single` with `left` and `right`; 2) It represents the thrower's hand action in the experiment, which may be different from the command. 
    * hand_vertical_thrower: the relative vertical position of the hand of the thrower at the moment `throw`.
      * value: `overhead`, `overhand`, `chest` or `underhand`
    * hand_vertical_catcher: similar to above "hand_vertical_thrower" but for the catcher
    * hand_horizontal_thrower: the relative horizontal position of the hand of the thrower at the moment `throw`.
      * value: `right`, `middle` or `left` 
    * hand_horizontal_catcher: similar to above "hand_horizontal_thrower" but for the catcher
    * position_thrower: the location of the thrower in The coordinates at the moment `throw`. 
      * x, z: 2 dimensional position
      <!-- * this is different from the `position` in the previous subject command like "sub2_cmd" -->
    * position_catcher: the location of the catcher in The coordinates at the moment `throw`.
      * x, z: 2 dimensional position
    * object_flying_speed: the flying speed of the thrown-away object in an unit of m/s.
    * time_point: the timestamps of streams at the moment `throw`. 
      * stream id
        * frame: the frame index of the corresponding stream
        * timestamp: the UNIX timestamp in nanoseconds of the corresponding stream 
  * catch: annotation data for the moment `catch`
    * hand: grasp mode for catching the object
      * value: `left`, `right` or `both`
    * hand_vertical: the relative vertical position of the hand of the catcher at the moment `catch (stable)`.
    * hand_horizontal: the relative horizontal position of the hand of the catcher at the moment `catch (stable)`.
    * position: the location of the catcher in The coordinates at the moment `catch (touch)`.
    * time_point_touch: the timestamps of streams when catching happens (i.e., when the hand of the catcher first touches the object in the flight).
      * stream id
        * frame: the frame index of the corresponding stream
        * timestamp: the UNIX timestamp in nanoseconds of the corresponding stream 
    * time_point_stable: the timestamps of streams when catching stabilizes (i.e., the hands and the object keeps relatively stable).
      * same data format as above "time_point_touch"
<!-- </details> -->
<br>

## Supporting Files
<!-- <details><summary>Exlanation about subjects/objects.csv and log.xlsx </summary> -->
* **subjects.csv**: the list of the subjects participating in the experiments
  * subject ID
* **objects.csv**: the list of used objects
  * object name
  * characteristic: `rigid`, `soft` or `printed`
  * attached with optitrack markers: 
    * 1: yes
    * 0: no
* **log.xlsx**: logbook with the recording parameters of all takes. 
  * **{subject ID} sheet**: each sheet maintains all instructions received by a subject during recording and is named by the id of the subject. Each entry in the sheet describes one recording setting.
    * no: the index of the entry in the spreadsheet 
    * object: the name of the object
    * equipped: if the subject is equipped with the helmet and the gloves to record data or not
      * 1: equipped
      * 0: not equipped
    * action: the action that the subject is supposed to perform when recording
      * `throw` or `catch`
    * hand: the instruction for using either single or both hands to perform the action
      * `single`, `both` or `void` (no constraint)
    * position: the initial location where the subject shall stand at the start of each recording
      * x: in range [0, 1, 2, 3]
      * y: in range [0, 1, 2, 3]
    * height: the relative vertical location for the subject hand
      * `overhead`, `overhand`, `chest`, `underhand` or `void` (no constraint)
    * horizon: the relative horizontal location of the subject hand
      * `left`, `middle`, `right` or `void` (no constraint)
    * speed: the relative velocity at which the object is supposed to be tossed out 
      * `fast`, `normal`, `slow` or `void` (no constraint)
    * take_id: the id of the take
    * success: the result of catching. 
      * 1: success
      * 0: failed
    * verified: if the recording has been verified. 
      * 1: verified and no problem detected
      * 0: verification not finished
      * -1: problem detected
    * annotated: if the annotation has been finished. 
      * 1: finished
      * 0: not finished

<!-- </details> -->


## Reference

A quick reference to the terms used above.

<!-- ## Terms We Created -->

* subject 1 and 2
  * subject 1: the subject who is equipped with the helmet and the gloves. The left person in Figure 4 of [the paper]().
  * subject 2: the subject who is equipped with only the head band. The right person in Figure 4 of [the paper]().
* OptiTrack object ID 
  * 115: the helmet
  * 116: the right hand tracking plate
  * 117: the left hand tracking plate
  * 118: the headband
  * 101: airplane
  * 102: round_plate
  * 103: apple
  * 104: banana
  * 105: hammer
  * 106: long_neck_bottle
  * 107: wristwatch
  * 108: bowl
  * 109: block
  * 110: cylinder
  * 111: cube
  * 112: torus
  * 113: wrench
  * 114: leopard
  * 119: toothbrus
* ZED device SN
  * 17471: the fixed third-person (side) view ZED RGBD sensor
  * 24483054: the dynamic egocentric view ZED RGBD sensor
  * 28280967:the fixed third-person (back) view ZED RGBD sensor 
* Stream ID
  * rgbd0: the fixed third person (side) view ZED RGBD sensor
  * rgbd1: the dynamic egocentric view ZED RGBD sensor
  * rgbd2: the fixed third-person (back) view ZED RGBD sensor 
  * event: event camera
  * left_hand_pose: left hand pose recorded by stretchsense gloves
  * right_hand_pose: right hand pose recorded by stretchsense gloves
  * sub1_head_motion: the motion of the subject 1's head (helmet) recorded by OptiTrack
  * sub1_left_hand_motion: the motion of the subject 1's left hand (left hand glove) recorded by OptiTrack
  * sub1_right_hand_motion: the motion of the subject 1's right hand (right hand glove) recorded by OptiTrack
  * sub2_head_motion: the motion of the subject 2's head (headband) recorded by OptiTrack

<!-- 5. pose coordinates: there are three coordinates involved for positioning 

   * global OptiTrack coordinates: the coordinates specified and used by the OptiTrack system
   * local coordinates: see figure xxx in The paper, and the origin is defined at the bottom right of the throw-catch zone
   * local rough coordinates: the simplified local coordinates only used to instruct the initial positions of subjects in data collection. -->
